This project consists of 3 Demos involving the setting up of a cubic environment map.


Demo 1: Cubemapping. It applies the concept of layer rendering in Metal to create a cube texture which will be displayed as a background environment map.

Metal applications have 2 other ways of creating a cube map texture. One method is to instantiate six instances of 2D MTLTexture from 6 graphic images. The MTLTextureDescriptor class function is then called

        textureCubeDescriptor(pixelFormat:, size:, mipmapped:)

to create a 3D MTLTexture. Finally the pixels of the six 2D MTLTextures are copied to 6 slices of the 3D cube MTLTexture.

Another method is to call the MTLTextureLoader function:

	newTexture(name:, scaleFactor:, bundle:, options:)

to load the 6 images to instantiate the cubemap texture. These 6 images are placed in a cubetexture set within the application's Assets.xcassets folder.

See Apple's "LODwithFunctionSpecialization" or "Deferred Lighting" demo.

Once the cubemap texture is created, it can be applied to a skybox or used to texture the 6 faces of a box. 

This demo will perform a simulation of a reflection of the environment. 


Details on creating a cube map using layer rendering in Metal
The cubemap texture is created using the following procedure:

a) Six square graphic images are loaded and instantiated as NSImage objects. An array of 6 CGImages are created from these NSImage instances.

b) They are converted into instances of MTLTextures (type2D) using the MTKTextureLoader function

	newTexture(cgImage, options)

c) The MTLRenderPassDescriptor and MTLRenderPipelineDescriptor objects of an offscreen renderer are setup. To apply the idea of layer rendering in Metal, the renderTargetArrayLength property of the MTLRenderPassDescriptor object is set to 6. This will enable layer rendering. The inputPrimitiveTopology property of the MTLRenderPipelineDescriptor object must be set to "MTLPrimitiveTopologyClass.triangle" since layered rendering is enabled.

d) The 6 slices of the cube map are then rendered during a render pass using a MTLRenderCommandEncoder object. Refer to the function "createCubemapTexture".


For best performance during rendering to screen, the cubemap texture should be created before entering the main display loop.


Once the cubemap texture is created, a second MTLRenderCommandEncoder object uses it to draw a skybox.

A third MTLRenderCommandEncoder object uses the cubemap texture to simulate a reflection of the environment as displayed by the skybox.

Both the second and third render passes are executed within the main display loop.





Demo 2: Convert an EquiRectangular map to six 2D cubic maps.

The fragment function in this demo is a port of an OpenGL fragment shader published by LearnOpenGL.com.

Due the differences between coordinate systems between Metal and OpenGL, some minor additions to the ported fragment shader code is necessary. For instance, the 2D texture coordinate system in Metal is as follows:

origin: top left hand corner of the 2x2 quad with
the s-axis: horizontally from left to right, and,
the t-axis: vertically from top to bottom.


In OpenGL, the texture coordinate system is:

origin: lower left hand corner of the 2x2 quad with
the s-axis: horizontally from left to right, and,
the t-axis: vertically from bottom to top.

As mentioned in the source code, four of the faces of the cube texture are generated correctly. The other 2 faces viz. +Y and -Y are in the wrong order. No modification to the source code of the fragment shader is necessary if we reverse 2 lines of code in the function "createCubemapTexture_RH" of the main swift program to:

       viewMatrix = matrix_look_at_right_hand(float3(0,0,0),
                                               float3(0,-1,0),      // centre of -Y face
                                               float3(0,0,-1))
        captureViewMatrices.append(viewMatrix)

        viewMatrix = matrix_look_at_right_hand(float3(0,0,0),
                                               float3(0,1,0),       // centre of +Y face
                                               float3(0,0,1))
       captureViewMatrices.append(viewMatrix)


Once the view is displayed, the user may save the 6 cubic maps generated by this Metal application to disk by pressing "s" or "S". He/she can visually compare the 6 cubic maps with those within the "Images" folder of this project. The images within this folder were obtained by running an OpenGL program which is not included in this project.

The OpenGL program is a written in cpp and one of its operations is to call the following OpenGL fragment shader:


#version 330 core

out vec4 FragColor;

in vec3 WorldPos;

uniform sampler2D equirectangularMap;

const vec2 invAtan = vec2(0.1591, 0.3183);

vec2 SampleSphericalMap(vec3 v)
{
    vec2 uv = vec2(atan(v.z, v.x),
                   asin(v.y));
    uv *= invAtan;
    uv += 0.5;
    return uv;
}

void main()
{
    vec2 uv = SampleSphericalMap(normalize(WorldPos));
    vec3 color = texture(equirectangularMap, uv).rgb;

    FragColor = vec4(color, 1.0);
}


The 6 OpenGL textures output by the OpenGL fragment are written out as .HDR files in RGBE format. They are used as inputs to Demo 3.


Note: the CIImage function

	writeHEIFRepresentation(of:, to:, format:, colourSpace:, options)

requires macOS 13.4 or the program will crash.






Demo 3: Convert six 2D Cubic environment maps to an EquiRectangular map.

This demo loads and instantiates a MTLTexture of type cube from 6 .HDR files located in the "Images" folder of this project.

An offscreen renderer is called to convert the six 2D Cubic environment maps to a 1:1 EquiRectangular projection (aka Spherical Projection) map.

Finally, within the main rendering loop, the generated EquiRectangular map is displayed as 2:1 rectangular image. We have to scale the geometry (a 4:2 quad) to fit Metal's [2,2,1] NDC (normalised device coordinates) box.


The texture output by the fragment function "outputEquiRectangularTexture" can be saved to disk by pressing an "s"/"S" key. To output the 1:1 EquiRectangular map as a 2:1 graphic, an Affine transformation is performed on the generated 1:1 graphic.


Requirements: XCode 9.x, Swift 4.x and macOS 10.13.4 or later.



References:

https://learnopengl.com/PBR/IBL/Diffuse-irradiance

http://paulbourke.net/panorama/cubemaps/index.html

// https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48872043/how-to-load-16-bit-images-into-metal-textures


